<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Research - Medieval Galician-Portuguese Poetry</title>
        <meta charset="utf-8" />
        <link href="CSS/index.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
    </head>
    <body>
        <!--#include virtual="NavMenu.html" -->
        <h1 id="top">Research</h1>
        <div>
            <p> Our <a href="about_main.xhtml">project</a> involves two different research
                questions, and as such, the methodologies used to answer them are quite diverse.</p>
            <p>If you are interested in knowing how we have coded the poets' biographies, check out
                our <a href="#research_mapping">mapping</a> section. You can also find there the
                technical details that explain how we displayed our data using Google Maps and
                Google Earth.</p>
            <p>For more information about the use of social network analysis methods to study the
                relationships between the poets, visit the <a href="#research_social-network"
                    target="_blank">social networking</a> section.</p>
            <p>Finally, you can find <a href="#research_linguistic">here</a> all the information
                regarding the linguistic analysis.</p>
        </div>
        <div>
            <h2 id="research_mapping">Mapping Medieval Galician-Portuguese Poets</h2>
            <p>Between the twelfth and fourteenth centuries, there was a poetic movement in the
                Galician-Portuguese language throughout the kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula (with
                the exception of Catalonia where they used Provençal). Medieval Galician-Portuguese
                    <em>Cantigas</em> (songs) remain as one of the richest parts of Iberian
                Peninsula's Middle Ages heritage.</p>
            <p>One thousand six hundred seventy nine songs written by 187 troubadours and minstrels
                arrived to us in the form of the <em><a
                        href="http://cantigas.fcsh.unl.pt/manuscritos.asp?ling=eng" target="_blank"
                        >Cancioneiros</a></em> (songbooks). In these project, we analize some of
                these troubadours through time and space with the intention of gaining a better
                understanding of how this poetic school had developed from a socio-historic point of
                view.</p>
            <h3>The personography</h3>
            <ul>
                <li>Using the <em><a href="http://cantigas.fcsh.unl.pt/index.asp?ling=eng"
                            target="_blank">Base de datos da Lírica Profana Galego-Portuguesa
                            (MedDB)</a></em> as our main source, we selected fifty-two troubadours
                    attending to diachronic criteria. We chose every poet from the first, fourth and
                    five periods: the lower number of poets from these periods forced us to select
                    them all so as to work with a significant corpus. From the second period, we
                    left out the seven poets with the lowest certainty about their biographies. For
                    the selection of the poets from the third period, which represents 75% of the
                    corpus, besides certainty, we added other criteria such as the origin (selecting
                    every poet who wasn't Galician or Portuguese, so other nationalities were
                    represented) or the number of songs preserved (as a way to discern the most
                    important authors).</li>
                <li>We used <a href="http://www.tei-c.org/Roma/" target="_blank">TEI Roma</a> to
                    customize our XML schema (read more at the <a
                        href="http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml" target="_blank">Text Encoding
                        Initiative</a> site).</li>
                <li>For each poet, we marked-up his name, nationality, birthplace, social status,
                    occupation, and affiliation. We looked up this information into two databases:
                    in the <em><a href="http://cantigas.fcsh.unl.pt/index.asp?ling=eng"
                            target="_blank">MedDB</a></em> and the <em><a
                            href="http://www.cirp.es/pls/bdo2/f?p=103:2:4773368442203375810"
                            target="_blank">Cantigas Medievais Galego Portuguesas</a></em>. We have
                    also used <em><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page" target="_blank"
                            >Wikipedia</a>
                    </em> to get additional biographical information (especially of kings and
                    counts).</li>
                <li>We added a <code>@certainty</code> attribute inside every
                        <code>&lt;nationality&gt;</code> element whose values go from <q>low</q> and
                        <q>medium</q> to <q>high</q>. When there were was other pieces of
                    information whose certainty was questioned by our sources, we coded them using
                    again this attribute with values that went from <q>unknown</q> to <q>low</q> and
                        <q>medium.</q></li>
                <li> We used <a href="https://www.google.com/maps" target="_blank">Google Maps</a>
                    and <a href="http://tools.wmflabs.org/geohack/" target="_blank">GeoHack</a> to
                    find out the coordinates of every geographical reference we had in the
                    personography. Then we tagged them inside a <code>&lt;geo&gt;</code> element.
                    Since we did not add a <code>&lt;geoDecl&gt;</code> element in the TEI header to
                    define a coordinate system, we marked them up following the TEI default for such
                    cases: the contents of our <code>&lt;geo&gt;</code> element are a pair of
                    numbers separated by whitespace, to be interpreted as latitude followed by
                    longitude according to the World Geodetic System.</li>
                <li>To sum up, this is a sample of the coding of one of the poets: <div class="code">
<pre>&lt;person xml:id="JGarGlh"&gt;
    &lt;persName&gt;Johan Garcia de Guilhade&lt;/persName&gt;
    &lt;nationality key="pt" cert="high"&gt;Portuguese&lt;/nationality&gt;
    &lt;birth&gt;
        &lt;location&gt;
            &lt;placeName&gt;Milhazes, Barcelos&lt;/placeName&gt;
            &lt;geo&gt;41.490833,-8.660556&lt;/geo&gt;
        &lt;/location&gt;
    &lt;/birth&gt;
    &lt;socecStatus key="kn"&gt;Knight&lt;/socecStatus&gt;
    &lt;occupation key="tr"&gt;Troubadour&lt;/occupation&gt;
    &lt;floruit from="1240" to="1265" period="3"&gt;
        &lt;location corresp="#sousa" from="1240" to="1243"/&gt;
        &lt;location corresp="#jaen" from="1244" to="1248"/&gt;
        &lt;location corresp="#afonsX" from="1249" to="1253"/&gt;
        &lt;location corresp="#afonsIII"  from="1253" to="1265"/&gt;
    &lt;/floruit&gt;
&lt;/person&gt;</pre>
                    </div>
                </li>
                <li>We marked-up an ancillary file with every one of the affiliations, which
                    explains the <code>@corresp</code> values inside <code>floruit/location</code>.
                    We specified whether every one of them depended on a royal or a lordship
                    patronage. <div class="code">
<pre>&lt;place xml:id="sousa" type="noble"&gt;
    &lt;location&gt;
        &lt;placeName type="short"&gt;The Sousas&lt;/placeName&gt;
        &lt;placeName type="full"&gt;Court of D. Gonçalo Garcia de Sousa&lt;/placeName&gt;
        &lt;geo&gt;41.087778,-8.520278&lt;/geo&gt;
    &lt;/location&gt;
&lt;/place&gt;</pre>
                    </div>
                </li>
            </ul>
            <h3>The KML files</h3>
            <ul>
                <li>As a first step, we used XSLT for a XML to XML transformation in which we
                    modified the coordinates to the KML standard, that is: three numbers separated
                    by a comma, the first of them being the longitude, followed by the latitude and
                    the altitude. Since the altitude reference was meaningless for our project, we
                    added a 100 value as a default. <div class="code">
<pre>&lt;xsl:template match="@*|node()"&gt;
    &lt;xsl:copy&gt;
        &lt;xsl:apply-templates select="@*|node()"/&gt;
    &lt;/xsl:copy&gt;
&lt;/xsl:template&gt;
&lt;xsl:template match="geo"&gt;
    &lt;geo&gt;
        &lt;xsl:value-of select="concat(string-join((substring-after(current(), ','),
            substring-before(current(), ',')), ','), ',100')"/&gt;
    &lt;/geo&gt;
&lt;/xsl:template&gt;</pre>
                    </div>
                </li>
                <li>Then we employed XSLT again to transform the recently created XML file to
                    KML.</li>
                <li>This transformation included two different <code>&lt;Placemark&gt;</code>
                    elements for each poet: one for their birthplace and one for their
                        <q>journey.</q> Inside the second one, the coordinates of every
                        <code>&lt;location&gt;</code> in the personography were inserted as descendants
                    of a <code>&lt;LineString&gt;</code> element so as to draw the paths. Thus, the
                    mark-up for one poet looks like this:<br />
                    <div class="code">
<pre>&lt;Placemark&gt;
    &lt;name&gt;Garcia Mendiz d' Eixo&lt;/name&gt;
    &lt;description&gt;Eixo, Garcia Mendiz d' Eixo's place of birth&lt;/description&gt;
    &lt;Style&gt;
        &lt;IconStyle&gt;
            &lt;Icon&gt;
                &lt;href&gt;http://maps.google.com/mapfiles/kml/paddle/
                    purple-stars.png&lt;/href&gt;
            &lt;/Icon&gt;
        &lt;/IconStyle&gt;
    &lt;/Style&gt;
    &lt;Point&gt;
        &lt;coordinates&gt;-8.570415,40.631709,100&lt;/coordinates&gt;
    &lt;/Point&gt;
&lt;/Placemark&gt;
&lt;Placemark&gt;
    &lt;description&gt;Garcia Mendiz d' Eixo's journey&lt;/description&gt;
    &lt;styleUrl&gt;#WhiteLine&lt;/styleUrl&gt;
    &lt;LineString&gt;
        &lt;tessellate&gt;0&lt;/tessellate&gt;
        &lt;coordinates&gt;
            -8.570415,40.631709,100
            -8.47,40.24,100
            -0.883533,41.650192,100 
            -8.520278,41.087778,100 
            -5.570956,42.600636,100
        &lt;/coordinates&gt;
    &lt;/LineString&gt;
&lt;/Placemark&gt;</pre>
                    </div>
                </li>
                <li>We stablished also a <code>&lt;Placemark&gt;</code> element for every one of the affiliations:<br />
                    <div class="code">
<pre>&lt;Placemark&gt;
    &lt;name&gt;The Trabas&lt;/name&gt;
    &lt;description&gt;House of Traba Court (noble court)&lt;/description&gt;
    &lt;Style&gt;
        &lt;IconStyle&gt;
            &lt;Icon&gt;
                &lt;href&gt;http://maps.google.com/mapfiles/kml/paddle/red-circle.png&lt;/href&gt;
            &lt;/Icon&gt;
        &lt;/IconStyle&gt;
    &lt;/Style&gt;
    &lt;Point&gt;
        &lt;coordinates&gt;-7.71765,42.063,100&lt;/coordinates&gt;
    &lt;/Point&gt;
&lt;/Placemark&gt;</pre>
                    </div>
                </li>
                <li>Since we had used <code>@certainty</code> attributes to encode the information
                    that was dubious according to our sources, we referred to those values in our
                    XSLT to create different <code>&lt;IconStyle&gt;</code> elements.<br />
                    <div class="code">
<pre>&lt;xsl:template match="person"&gt;
    &lt;!--Other template rules--&gt;
    &lt;IconStyle&gt;
        &lt;xsl:choose&gt;
            &lt;xsl:when test="birth[@cert='low']"&gt;
                &lt;Icon&gt;
                    &lt;href&gt;http://maps.google.com/mapfiles/kml/paddle/ltblu-blank.png&lt;/href&gt;
                &lt;/Icon&gt;
            &lt;/xsl:when&gt;
            &lt;xsl:when test="birth/location[@cert='unknown'] | birth/location[@cert='low']"&gt;
                &lt;Icon&gt;
                    &lt;href&gt;http://maps.google.com/mapfiles/kml/paddle/ltblu-blank.png&lt;/href&gt;
                &lt;/Icon&gt;
            &lt;/xsl:when&gt;
            &lt;xsl:otherwise&gt;
                &lt;Icon&gt;
                    &lt;href&gt;http://maps.google.com/mapfiles/kml/paddle/purple-stars.png&lt;/href&gt;
                &lt;/Icon&gt;
            &lt;/xsl:otherwise&gt;
        &lt;/xsl:choose&gt;
    &lt;/IconStyle&gt;
    &lt;!--Other template rules--&gt;
&lt;/xsl:template&gt;</pre>
                    </div>
                </li>
                <li>We used the <code>@period</code> attribute of our personography to create five
                    different KML files so we would have, as a result, one map for each period.</li>
                <li>For one of the transformations, instead of using the <code>@period</code>
                    attribute as a filter, we introduced the range of years we had coded inside
                        <code>@from</code> and <code>@to</code> attributes within a
                        <code>&lt;TimeSpan&gt;</code> element.</li>
            </ul>
            <h3>Embedding the maps in our website</h3>
            <ul>
                <li>We uploaded the KML files into <a href="https://www.google.com/maps"
                        target="_blank">Google Maps</a>.</li>
                <li>Then we opened in the <a href="https://developers.google.com/maps-engine/"
                        target="_blank">Google Maps Engine API</a>.</li>
                <li>After adding an additional description to our maps, we published them, we
                    changed the sharing settings to <q>Public</q> and got the <q>shared link</q>
                    that we introduced in our HTML file inside an <code>&lt;iframe&gt;</code>
                    element.</li>
                <li>For embeding the Google Earth globe we used the <a
                        href="http://dh.obdurodon.org/kml-gadget.xhtml">KML embed gadget</a>.</li>
            </ul>
            <h3>Other criteria</h3>
            <ul>
                <li>We specify the level of credibility of each one of our personography entries
                    using <code>@certainty</code> attributes. This makes it possible for us to
                    visually represent that credibility with the intention of making these maps more
                    legitimate from a historiographic point of view.</li>
                <li>When we couldn't stablish a birthplace from one of the poets, we used the
                    nationality information as a reference. Then we randomly selected a geographical
                    point for each nationality and employed those as the coordinates for the
                    birthplaces, adding a <code>@certainty="unknown"</code> attribute. For example,
                    the birthplace of every Galician poet we couldn't place is represented in the
                    map as a light blue pinpoint over what we could say it is the geographical
                    center of the Galician territory.</li>
                <li>We were more rigorous when dealing with the poets' shifts than with the courts'
                    ones. This means that, for every affiliation, we chose the coordinates of what
                    we could define as the main court and used those sistematically.</li>
            </ul>
            <a href="#top">Go to top</a>
        </div>
        <div>
            <h2 id="research_social-network">Social Network Analysis</h2>
            <p>To find out which were the most relevant cultural centers in the Iberian kingdoms
                during the Middle Ages we graphed relational patterns through a <a
                    href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_network_analysis" target="_blank"
                    >social network</a> that you can find <a href="networks.xhtml" target="_blank"
                    >here</a>.</p>
            <p>As we explained in the <a href="#research_mapping" target="_blank">mapping
                    section</a>, one of the problems of building historical personographies is data
                accuracy. In our sources, the information we care about is very often introduced
                with some degree of uncertainty. Moreover, we studying a period of upheaval, defined
                by conflicts, changes and reorganizations. An easy location reference, such as a
                particular king's court, becomes a very difficult one when trying to transform it to
                some coordinates. Kings and noblemen move, and their courts and political influences
                with them. The references are often unclear, and even if we have tried to be as
                rigorous as possible, we have had to make some concessions to inaccuracy in favor of
                functionality.</p>
            <p>However, with social network methods you can be much more accurate in some ways when
                you disregard geographical data and definite time references and keep only the
                social relationships.</p>
            <h3>Methodology</h3>
            <ol>
                <li>To build the social network we used <a href="http://www.cytoscape.org"
                        target="_blank">Cytoscape</a>, an open source software platform for
                    visualizing interaction networks. Cytoscape was originally designed for
                    biological research, but now it is a general platform that can be used to
                    visualize and analyze network graphs of any kind involving nodes and edges (i.e.
                    social networks).</li>
                <li>We transformed our personography into .csv files using XSLT. </li>
                <li> Once we had our data into tables, we uploaded those into Cytoscape and created
                    the initial network.</li>
                <li>We defined the columns containing the troubadours and their patrons as nodes.
                    The period was chosen as the interaction value, and then we selected the
                    nationality as an edge attribute. Afterwards, we uploaded the table containing
                    the type of patron (either royal, noble or unknown) as a node attribute.</li>
                <li>Cytoscape automatically analyses the data and gives you back an exhaustive
                    report. This means that you can customize your graph according to centrality
                    measures, that is, the relative importance of nodes and edges in the network
                    (the elements that keep it together, in other words).</li>
                <li> We customized the graphic elements of the network using Cytoscape buid-in
                    tools. We mapped our data to node color, label, edge thickness, edge color, etc.
                    according to the following configurations: <ul>
                        <li>Node size and label size depends on <span id="degreecentrality">degree
                                centrality</span>. The bigger the node is, the highest number of
                            ties to other nodes has.</li>
                        <li>The width of the edges is related to <q><span id="edgebetweenness">edge
                                    betweenness</span></q>, that is the number of shortest paths
                            between pairs of nodes that run along it. The thicker the stroke is, the
                            larger is its influence on the transfer of relations through the
                            network.</li>
                        <li>The color of the nodes defines its type. We discern poets from the
                            “venues” where they develop their cultural activity. In this last
                            category, we express when this venue is a royal court, a lord patronage,
                            or an actual geographic place.</li>
                        <li>The type of stroke makes it possible to visualize the origin of the
                            poets so, in a way, we still preserve part of our geographical
                            data.</li>
                    </ul>
                </li>
            </ol>
            <a href="#top">Go to top</a>
        </div>
        <div>
            <h2 id="research_linguistic">Linguistic Analysis</h2>
            <p class="questions">How did the Portuguese pronoun system change throughout the Late
                Middle Ages?</p>
            <h3>The Language</h3>
            <p> Galician-Portuguese was the spoken language in the western area of the Iberian
                Peninsula until mid-fourteenth century. Derived from Latin, it emerged progressively
                as a different language before the ninth century, in the territories of the old
                Kingdom of Galicia, which covered the regions of modern day Galicia and northern
                Portugal. In this sense, we can say that the word Galician-Portuguese designates not
                only a language, but also a phase in its development, which later would lead to the
                differentiation between present Galician and Portuguese languages due to political
                and sociolinguistic circumstances.</p>
            <h3>Some History</h3>
            <p>Portuguese, like most other Romance languages, came from Latin, or more specifically,
                an altered form of Lating called <q>vulgar Latin</q>. The transition from vulgar
                Latin to the Romance languages was due to maany factors, notably relative geographic
                isolation of the different groups of language users and subsequent linguistic
                superimposures by linguistic subtrate languages. An example of the linguistic
                superimposure is the intensified stress accent superimposed upon vulgar Latin of the
                Iberian Peninsula by invading German races. Vulgar Latin, along the western coast of
                the Iberian Peninsula, which had less of the Germanic stress accent than anywhere
                else, grew into Portuguese. The exact date of this trasformation is unclear but the
                earliest documents in Portuguese appeared at the end of the twelfth century and mark
                the historical beginning of Old Portuguese.</p>
            <p>For four centuries, the language underwent amny changes, one of the most important
                being a marked intensification of the stress accent, which was represented by an
                increase in syncope found in verse and by the tendency toward greater word
                individuation. Toward the end of the sixteenth century, nearly all distinct
                characteristics of Old Portuguese disappeared, leaving the rough equivalent of the
                modern Portuguese spoken today. </p>
            <h3>Methodology</h3>
            <p>For the diachronic variation study, we chose a sample of authors from five time
                periods used to divide our timeline. Using the work of <a
                    href="http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39015034652472;view=1up;seq=1"
                    target="_blank">Williams (1962)</a>, we marked up pronouns and categorized them,
                using Williams's standards, as <q>old</q> or <q>new</q>. Then, we determined how
                accurate the claims made by Williams are by looking at the distribution of the
                    <q>old</q> and <q>new</q> pronouns across the five time periods.</p>
            <p>Williams's claim is that Old Portuguese appeared at the end of the 12th century and
                had completed its transformation into modern Portuguese by approximately the end of
                the 16th century. Our goal in looking at pronouns used in poetry of medeival
                Galician troubadours is to see if Williams's claims are represented in the
                distribution of pronouns across the poems. </p>
            <p>The Galician-Portuguese poetic movement remains a rich cultural event in the history
                of the Iberian Peninsula. The troubadours and minstrels who authored the songs were
                greatly revered, as were their works. Therefore, the Portuguese used in their poems
                could be seen as representative of the language being used at the time. If anything,
                it is one of the most consistent collections of texts because it spans roughly three
                centuries during the evolution of the language into modern Portuguese. By tracking
                the use of archaic and modern pronouns in the poems, we can begin to understand the
                timeline of how the Portuguese language changed over time.</p>
            <p>This, obviously, is just a scratch at the surface of language change. In this
                project, we only look at personal pronouns because they had quantifiable changes
                that could be easily recognized and marked. A more in-depth study might include
                other linguistic features, such as phonological features of orthography. We hope
                that this project might open the door for more research into this realm of study. </p>
            <h3>The Markup</h3>
            <p>After formatting the poems in an XML document, the next step was to mark all the
                personal pronouns that Williams mentioned in his study. Below are charts taken from
                Williams's research.</p>
            <table>
                <tr class="head">
                    <th>Archaic</th>
                    <th>Modern</th>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>mego, comego, migo</td>
                    <td>comigo</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>tego, contego, tigo</td>
                    <td>contigo</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>sego, consego, sigo, consigo</td>
                    <td>consigo</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>mim</td>
                    <td>mi</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>ele</td>
                    <td>el</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>eis</td>
                    <td>eles</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>nosco</td>
                    <td>connosco</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>vosco</td>
                    <td>convosco</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>li</td>
                    <td>lhe</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>lis, lhis</td>
                    <td>lhes</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>che</td>
                    <td>te</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>xe</td>
                    <td>se</td>
                </tr>
            </table>
            <p>In the texts, we used regex to mark all personal pronouns, modern and archaic, with
                the following tag:</p>
            <code>&lt;w ana="#pronoun"&gt;pronoun&lt;/w&gt;</code>
            <p>Importantly, we did not want to miss any pronouns that were hyphenated or had been
                assimilated into surrounding words. Therefore, we used the expression:</p>
            <code><span class="code">Find:</span> ([^a-z])(mi[m]?)([^a-z])</code><br />
            <code><span class="code">Replace with:</span> \1&lt;w
                ana="#pronounCode"&gt;\2&lt;/w&gt;\3</code>
            <p>The pronoun code refers to the features library document which is available to view
                on our GitHub. This allows us to find and calculate the pronouns based on their age
                classification, which is marked in the feature library. Using these labels, we will
                be able to calculate the percentage of modern and archaic forms and identify their
                distribution across the time spectrum of the poets.</p>
            <h3>Using eXide</h3>
            <p>First, we counted how many pronouns of all the pronouns we marked were archaic and
                how many were modern. We used XQuery to do so:</p>
            <div class="code2">
<pre>declare namespace tei="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0";
let $docTexts := doc('/course/iberian/data/songTextsThirdTry.xml')/tei:TEI
let $docFeat := doc('/course/iberian/aux/features.xml')/tei:TEI
let $modern := $docTexts//tei:w[substring(@ana,2) = 
    $docFeat//tei:fs[tokenize(@feats/string(),'\s+') = '#archaic']/@xml:id]
return $modern/string()</pre>
            </div>
            <p>Then we used another query to filter the results by period:</p>
            <div class="code2">
<pre>let $period := $docTexts//tei:div[descendant::tei:affiliation/@corresp='1']
let $modern := $period//tei:w[substring(@ana,2) = 
    $docFeat//tei:fs[tokenize(@feats/string(),'\s+') = '#archaic']/@xml:id]
return $modern</pre>
            </div>
            <a href="#top">Go to top</a>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
